AN ACT to amend the environmental conservation law, in relation to enacting the carbon dioxide removal leadership act; and to repeal certain provisions of the tax law relating to taxes on carbon dioxide emissions

The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and Assembly, do enact as follows:

Section 1. This act shall be known and may be cited as the “Carbon Dioxide Removal Leadership Act". Recognizing that one of the causes of anthropogenic 
climate change is a current excess of carbon dioxide concentration in the ambient atmosphere, this act directs New York state to procure the removal of
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere in order to catalyze the growth of equitable carbon dioxide removal projects, companies, and employment opportunities
in New York State. Such a mechanism will be authorized for a five-year pilot period and will entail annual procurement of durable, measurable, verifiable,
and immediately deliverable carbon dioxide removal projects located within New York State. The procurement of carbon dioxide removal services under this
act shall not create environmental burdens for or otherwise do harm to disadvantaged communities and shall incorporate preferential consideration for
projects that result in quantifiable economic and social benefits for such communities. The procurement of carbon dioxide removal services under this act
shall not be performed in connection with, or cause, enable or facilitate, the extraction of fossil fuels.

§ 2. The environmental conservation law is amended by adding a new article 7 to read as follows:
 
ARTICLE 76 CARBON DIOXIDE REMOVAL
 
Section 76-0101. Definitions.
76-0102. Carbon dioxide removal and equity survey.
76-0103. New York state carbon dioxide removal reverse auction.
76-0105. Carbon dioxide removal measurement, reporting and verification.
76-0107. Bid preferences.
76-0109. On-going bidder responsibilities.
76-0111. Reverse auction funding.
76-0115. Authority and compliance.
76-0117. Severability.

§ 76-0101. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

"Annual price per ton" means the maximum price per metric ton of CDR which the state will pay per bid in a given year.

"Annual removal target" means the minimum total volume of carbon dioxide removal, expressed in metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent, for which the Authority will solicit bids in a given year, such amount to be increased by the portion of the annual removal target not met in the prior year.

“the Authority” means the New York Energy Research and Development Authority.

"Bid" means a bid fulfilling the requirements of section 76-010 of this article.

"Bid price" means the total price the bidder is willing to be paid in a given bid for providing carbon dioxide removal.

"Bidder" means a person, entity or entities qualified to submit a bid pursuant to the requirements set forth in section 76-010 of this article.

"Carbon dioxide equivalent" or "CO2e" means the amount of carbon dioxide by mass that would produce the same global warming impact as a given mass of another greenhouse gas over an integrated twenty-five-year time frame after emission.

"Carbon dioxide removal" or "CDR" means removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, and durably storing it in geological, terrestrial, or ocean reservoirs, or in long-lived products for a minimum period of 100 years.

"CDR process" means the physical process by which carbon dioxide is removed from the atmosphere and durably sequestered or stored.

"CDR project" means the specific project which will be delivering the CDR outlined in a given bid.

“Deputy Commissioner” means the Office of the Deputy Commissioner for Equity and Justice of the Department of Environmental Conservation.

"Disadvantaged communities" means communities that bear burdens of negative public health effects, environmental pollution, impacts of climate change, and
possess certain socioeconomic criteria, or comprise high concentrations of low- and moderate-income households as defined in Section 75-0101 Chapter 43-B,
Article 75 of the Environmental Conservation (ENV) Law. 

"Durability" or "durable" means the secure sequestration of CO2e in the geosphere, in the ocean, in long-lived products, or otherwise, measured as a unit
of time.

“Environmental justice and equity community engagement and assessment report” means a form completed by the bidder, and verified by a qualified third
party verifier chosen by the Deputy Commissioner, that documents evidence that residents of disadvantaged communities have been consulted and afforded the
opportunity to provide comment and suggestions concerning the proposed project. The environmental justice and equity community engagement and assessment
form shall be formulated and approved by the Deputy Commissioner.  All reports submitted by bidders must be reviewed and approved by the Deputy
Commissioner as a condition of selection. The report shall include a description and quantification, where possible, of the following externalities and/or
co-benefits resulting from the CDR project: i) equity and environmental justice benefits; ii) ecosystem and ecological harms and co-benefits, including
impacts on the surrounding soil health, biodiversity, and water and air quality; and  iii) job creation and industrial development, and  health and
quality-of-life benefits, particularly in disadvantaged communities.

"Greenhouse gas" means carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, sulfur hexafluoride, and any other substance emitted into the air that may be reasonably anticipated to cause or contribute to anthropogenic climate change.

"Life-cycle analysis" or "LCA" means a complete, end-to-end analysis of the greenhouse gas emissions resulting from a CDR process, including, but not limited to, manufacturing, transportation, utilization, sequestration and other processes occurring prior to, during, or after, the CDR process which are required to achieve CDR.

"Measurement, reporting and verification" or "MRV" means the verified measurement and reporting of CDR using an objective, peer-reviewed and scientifically supported accounting methodology and taking into account regionally appropriate sampling and data collection methods to quantify emissions and removals associated with the CDR process and durability of removal instead of solely model-based or statistical methods.

"Megatonne" or "Mt" means one million metric tons.

"Minimum bid" means the minimum volume of CDR for which a bidder may submit a bid.

"Reverse auction" means a bidding process in which qualified bidders submit bids for CDR to remove and durably store a specified quantity of CO2e in
exchange for payment by the state.

"Social cost" means a measure, in dollars, of the long-term damage done by a ton of CO2e emissions in a given year.

"Ton" means metric ton, or tonne (one thousand kilograms).

"Total annual bid" means the total volume of CDR for which bids were submitted in a given year.

§ 76-0102. Carbon dioxide removal and equity survey.

1. Prior to the initiation of the reverse auction, the Authority shall publish a survey of CDR opportunities within the state. Such survey must include,
but may not be limited to:

a. Data gathered by the Authority pursuant to CDR verification as required by section 76-0109 of this article;

b. Review of CDR processes in New York state with 0.1Mt or greater scale potential this decade and one-hundred-year or greater durability, with a
description for each of water and land-use requirements, LCA and energy requirements, potential harms, and potential co-benefits, including job creation
or loss, industrial development, ecosystem sustainability, and advancement or degradation of environmental equity or social justice

2. At the completion of the survey, the Authority shall conduct regional direct engagement with members of disadvantaged and environmental justice
communities throughout the state to in order for the Authority to provide information concerning the objectives, and intended benefits and outcomes of the
CDR procurement program and enable members of the public to provide comment and suggestions related to the CDR procurement program's design,
implementation and shared community benefits.

§ 76-0103. New York state carbon dioxide removal reverse auction.

1. Pursuant to paragraph a of subdivision four of section 75-0109 of this chapter, beginning in the year two thousand twenty-four, the Authority shall be
directed to conduct an annual reverse auction for the purchase of CDR. The Authority shall initiate the reverse auction on April first and close the
reverse auction on June thirtieth of each year the reverse auction is held.

2. The Authority shall conduct the reverse auction subject to the following requirements:

a. All CDR and material operations of each proposed CDR project submitted by bidders must be located within the state or waters within fifty nautical
miles of the state;

b. CDR project proposals that incorporate enhanced oil recovery or otherwise facilitate the extraction, refinement or delivery of fossil fuel energy
sources including petroleum, natural gas and coal, or which serve to perpetuate fossil fuel use in any sector of the economy in New York state, the United
States or globally shall be ineligible for selection; 

c. All bidders must include within their CDR project proposal a declaration that the CDR project will not cause adverse impacts to the environment or
community.

d. The Authority shall accept qualifying bids up to the maximum average price per ton of CDR to meet the annual removal target;

e. Twenty-five percent of the annual carbon removal target shall be composed of projects that  each deliver a maximum removal volume that does not exceed
five percent of the annual removal target;

f. Twenty-five percent of the annual removal target shall have a minimum durability of one thousand years (with the remaining seventy-five percent of the
annual removal target having a minimum durability of one hundred years); 

g. CDR project proposals bids shall demonstrate the ability to commence CDR no later than two years following the entering into contract with the
Authority; and

h. The Authority shall not accept bids causing the total annual bid to exceed the maximum average price per ton pursuant to subdivision four of this section.

4. Selected CDR projects will be compensated for CDR provided over a maximum contract term of ten years. Payment shall be made on an annual basis and contingent upon successful, complete and verified removal of the agreed upon carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. 

5. The maximum average price per ton of CDR shall be three hundred fifty dollars in the year two thousand twenty-five, and shall decrease by five percent each year, as adjusted for inflation.

6. During the authorized five-year term of the pilot program, the Authority will procure CDR in the following quantities.
Ten thousand tons of C02e in two thousand and twenty-four
Twenty thousand tons of CO2e in two thousand and twenty-five
Forty thousand tons of CO2e in two thousand and twenty-six
Eighty thousand tons of CO2e in two thousand and twenty-seven
One hundred sixty thousand tons of CO2e in two thousand and twenty-eight

7. The Authority shall accept qualifying bids sufficient to meet the annual removal target, based on the criteria outlined in section 76-0107 of this
article. If the total annual bid is less than the annual removal target, the Authority shall increase the annual removal target in the subsequent year by
the difference between the annual removal target and the total annual bid.

8. The Authority shall publicly announce the winning bids; publicly release the winning bidders' proposals and scorecards and contract with the winning bidders no later than September thirtieth of each year. 

§ 76-0105. Carbon dioxide removal measurement, reporting and verification.
 
1. Each bid submitted to the Authority must contain the following information:

a. Legal name, address, contact information and history of prior participation in the CDR reverse auction, or other public or private-market procurement
programs, for each entity or person submitting a bid;

b. The total volume of CDR to be achieved pursuant to the bid;

c. When CDR will commence, and the delivery term the proposed CDR project;

d. A description of the CDR process and the CDR project;

e. Full LCA detailing carbon-efficiency of all processes required to achieve the proposed CDR project;

f. Land area and water volume employed for CDR project;

g. Completed environmental justice and equity community engagement and assessment report. 
During the project contract period, CDR projects may be subject to audit and review by the Deputy Commissioner. Failure to fulfill or comply with all
terms and stipulations provided in the environmental justice and equity community engagement and assessment  approved by the Deputy Commissioner will
result in termination of the contract, rescission of funds or penalties and disqualification from future carbon dioxide removal solicitations issued by
New York State. 

h. Description of the MRV the bidder will employ for the CDR project, from an independent third-party deemed acceptable by the Authority that verifies all requirements of this section;

i. Legally binding attestation by each bidder that the information provided is accurate and that all requirements of this section are met; and

j. Any additional information the Authority reasonably requests to assess the bid.

2. The LCA must demonstrate, and the MRV must verify, the specific carbon-efficiency of the CDR project and that the carbon dioxide will be removed from the atmosphere and securely and durably stored for at least the period committed to in the CDR project proposal. 

3. The CDR project for which the bid is submitted must be unique to this transaction and additional to any prior or otherwise existing or planned CDR; may
not be used as part of any other private or public transaction for CDR; and must create new and additional climate benefit, and not take credit for
climate benefit that would occur in a no-intervention scenario.
.
4. Methods of CDR may include, but are not limited to:

a. Terrestrial mineralization or enhanced rock weathering;

b. Terrestrial biomass-based pathwayscarbon removal and storage such as biochar, bio-oil or bio-energy with carbon capture and sequestration;

c. OceanHydrological or marine-based pathwaysCDR including electro-chemical carbon capture, alkalinity enhancement, marine permaculture, deep-ocean sequestration of biomass, and coastal enhanced weathering;

d. Construction materials and products, the production of which directly contribute to the sequestration of carbon dioxide or other greenhouse gases,
including mass timber; or

e. Direct air carbon capture with durable geologic sequestration, or durable sequestrationutilization in the built environment including in concrete,
long-lived plastics, carbon fiber, or other durable goods.

§ 76-0107. Bid preferences.

The Authority shall create a scorecard to evaluate the bids received based on the following factors:

1. Price per ton;

2. CDR project is assessed to promote equity or environmental justice co-benefits within the state based on information contained in third-party verified
environmental justice and equity community engagement and assessment report; generates economic benefits to one or more disadvantaged communities as
defined in section 75-0109 of this chapter; 

3. Conservation efficiency in use of water, land, and  energy resources, with explicit preference for CDR projects with low water, land, and energy requirements, and CDR projects that exclusively employ renewable energy;

4. Number of jobs created by the CDR project in New York state; 

5. CDR project employs at least one bona fide labor organization that is actively engaged in  representing employees providing necessary operations and maintenance services for the carbon dioxide removal project at the time of such agreement. 

5. CDR project procures equipment and supplies from businesses located in New York state.

6. CDR project offers significant agricultural, ecological, or ecosystem co-benefits, and does not create harm; 

7. Scale potential of the CDR process in the state, and generally; 

8. Durability of CDR in excess of one hundred years; and

9. Delivery term for the proposed CDR project (i.e. CDR delivered more quickly is preferred).


§ 76-0109. On-going bidder responsibilities.

1. The Authority shall require each bidder provide periodic verification from an independent third party deemed satisfactory by the Authority that:

a. The volume of CDR removed from the atmosphere and stored meets or exceeds the amount provided in the bid; and

b. There has been no leakage of CO2e or material reduction in the number of years of CDR durability.

2. Upon a failure by the bidder to provide the verification required by the Authority, the Authority may take action to penalize the bidder, including,
but not limited to:

a. Levying fines or penalties against the bidder to recoup funds paid pursuant to the bid; or

b. Rejection of future bids by the bidder.

3. Subject only to the defenses set forth in subdivision four of this section, the bidder, its successors, assigns, and transferees of responsibilities,
liabilities, rights or economic benefits of the CDR, shall be liable for the social cost, as determined by the Authority pursuant to section 75-0113 of
this chapter, of any CO2e leakage or reduction in CDR durability.

§ 76-0111. Reverse auction funding.

Funding for the authorized five year reverse auction period, beginning in the year two thousand twenty-four and ending in two thousand twenty-eight, shall
be derived entirely from state revenues that have been accrued in preceding tax years from certain reinstated tax revenues on aviation gasoline which is
imported or caused to be imported into this state by a petroleum business which is registered under article twelve-A of the tax law as a distributor of
motor fuel or produced, refined, manufactured or compounded in this state by such a petroleum business.

§ 76-0115. Authority and compliance.

1. Nothing in this article shall limit the existing authority of a state entity to adopt and implement greenhouse gas emissions reduction measures,
including carbon dioxide removal.

2. Nothing in this article shall relieve any person, entity, or public agency of compliance with other applicable federal, state, or local laws or
regulations, including state air and water quality requirements, and other requirements for protecting public health or the environment.

3. Review under this act may be conducted in a proceeding under article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules at the instance of any person
aggrieved.

§ 76-0117. Severability.
If any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this article shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair, or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the word, phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph, section, or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.

§ 3. Subdivision (f) of section 301-e of the tax law is REPEALED.
§ 4. Paragraph of subdivision (a) of section11 of the tax law is REPEALED.
§ 5. This act shall take effect immediately.
